---
# File generated by dokgen. Do not edit. 
# Edit 'src/main/kotlin/docs/30_Drawing/C330_Asynchronous_image_loading.kt' instead.
layout: default
title: Asynchronous image loading
parent: Drawing
last_modified_at: 2026.02.16 13:45:53 +0000
nav_order: 330
has_children: false
---
 
# Asynchronous image loading

In scenarios in which images are required to be loaded without blocking 
the draw thread you can use `ColorBufferLoader`. This loader runs on its 
own thread and uses shared contexts of the underlying graphics API (OpenGL).

`ColorBufferLoader` maintains a prioritized loading queue, such that most 
recently touched images will be loaded first.

`ColorBufferLoader` maintains an unloading queue, such that image proxies 
that have not been touched for 5000ms will be unloaded automatically 
(unless the proxy is requested to be persistent).

The `ColorBufferLoader` loads URL strings, it supports loading from file 
and http/https. 
 
```kotlin
fun main() = application {
    program {
        extend {
            val proxy = colorBufferLoader.loadFromUrl("https://avatars3.githubusercontent.com/u/31103334?s=200&v=4")
            proxy.colorBuffer?.let {
                drawer.image(it)
            }
        }
    }
}
``` 
 
Here we see that `fromUrl` can safely be called many times as 
`ColorBufferLoader` caches these requests.
Accessing `proxy.colorBuffer` touches its internal timestamp and queues 
the image for loading if the proxy state is `NOT_LOADED`.

## Handling errors

Sometimes loading fails; for example because the file was not found, 
or the http connection timed out.
`ColorBufferLoader` signals such errors by placing `ColorBufferProxy` 
in `RETRY` state. The proxy can be taken out of
this state by calling its `.retry()` function.

Alternatively some errors cannot be retried; these will be signalled 
by setting the proxy state to `ERROR`. Such errors
should only occur if the loading of the image causes a non-IOException 
to be thrown. 

## Cancelling a queued image

Cancelling an image which is queued (and is thus in `QUEUED` state) for 
loading is done by calling `.cancel()` on the `ColorBufferProxy`. 
This will set the proxy state back to `NOT_LOADED`. 

[edit on GitHub](https://github.com/openrndr/openrndr-guide/blob/main/src/main/kotlin/docs/30_Drawing/C330_Asynchronous_image_loading.kt){: .btn .btn-github }