---
# File generated by dokgen. Do not edit. 
# Edit 'src/main/kotlin/docs/95_Use_cases/C530_Plotter_art.kt' instead.
layout: default
title: Pen plotters
parent: Use cases
last_modified_at: 2024.06.05 13:05:40 +0200
nav_order: 530
has_children: false
---
 
# Generating pen plotter art

A pen plotter is a computer output device that can draw
with a pen (or a brush, marker, etc) on a paper.
Some such devices move the pen in the X and Y axes, 
while others can move the paper instead.
 
Pen plotters were introduced in the 1950s and 60s
and have become popular among artists since the mid 2000s. 

Unlike other output devices like ink-jet and laser printers
which accept pixels, pen plotters must be fed with vector
data: lines and curves.

OPENRNDR provides a rich toolset to generate and manipulate
vector data.
    
## SVG vs g-code

There are two main file formats used to send designs to pen plotters:
 
- [SVG](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SVG) (Scalable Vector Graphics), used with newer devices like the AxiDraw. 
- [g-code](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G-code), often supported by older plotters, CNC devices and laser cutters.

OPENRNDR can easily load, manipulate, generate and save SVG files. There is a non-yet-merged contribution
to add [g-code support](https://github.com/openrndr/orx/pull/285).

The following sections focus on SVG.

## Hello world

This is one of the simplest programs we can write
to produce an SVG file containing just a circle. 
 
```kotlin
fun main() = application {
    program {
        val design = drawComposition {
            circle(drawer.bounds.center, 200.0)
        }
        design.saveToFile(File("data/design.svg"))
    }
}
``` 
 
The API in the composition drawer is almost identical
to the one of the standard drawer: we can use methods like
`segment`, `contour`, `shape`, `circle`, `rectangle`, etc.
    
Find more tips on
[using OPENRNDR with pen plotters](https://openrndr.discourse.group/t/openrndr-plotting-tricks-axidraw-etc/208)
in the forum.
 

[edit on GitHub](https://github.com/openrndr/openrndr-guide/blob/main/src/main/kotlin/docs/95_Use_cases/C530_Plotter_art.kt){: .btn .btn-github }